Modeling Virtual Memory in Temporal Forge

Our project models virtual memory in Unix systems as taught in several introductory CS courses or operating systems. In our model we focus on several properties that are emphasized such as mappings, permissions, process isolation, and more. The core functionality relates to mappings from virtual to physical addresses as well as multi level page table representations. This includes the process of address translation which requires traversing the data structure, as well as system state changes over time. Another goal that stemmed from this functionality is enforcing process isolation (between two processes) as well as kernel protection (user to kernel). The permission bits are used to prevent any of these violations.

An operating system has many different components and also interacts with hardware. We asbtracted away many parts of this and stripped it down to some basic Sigs such as Pages, Addresses, Index, Offset, Processes, Pagetables, and Pagetable Entries. We did NOT model memory at the byte level, TLBs, page faults and more. We also chose to limit our model to a 2 level pagetable design to minimize traversal. We believe that the chosen representation preserves the core structure needed to model/study safety properties of the OS. In building our model with sigs at this level of specificity, we found that many of our correctness properties emerged naturally from simple constraints. One key tradeoff we made was that we chose not to use real addresses which diminishes from being able to capture an accurate physical memory layout. However, by abstracting away and using Page entities, we removed the need to do any arithmetic while still being able to capture mapping relationships.

Our main safety properties revolve around process isolation and permission correctness. We took advantage of Temporal Forge to be able to simulate process switching, page mapping and unmapping, and other ways the system can evolve over time. The model will display the root page table for each process. To run the model, you can run main.frg and use the time controls to step through traces. We included custom visualizations offering two different views of the system that are relevant to safety properties. The structural view shoes the pagetable tree layout for each process with permissions and mappings visible. The physical memory view shows the layout of physical memory over time with different colors representing the validity of mappings (shared/free/mapped).

As computer science students who have learned a lot about systems, we found that even enforcing bare-minimum safety properties in an OS requires robust checks. The stakes are high since in practice, processes that do not respect these rules can overwrite one another or worse, can interfere with the all-powerful kernel! There are a lot of moving pieces and even modeling a stripped down version gave us a glimpse into how hard it might be to work as a kernel programmer.
